Damilola Michael (D.M.) Aderibigbe (born 1989) is a Nigerian poet and literary scholar based in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. He is an assistant professor of creative writing in the Center for Writers at the University of Southern Mississippi. == Early Life and Education == Born in Lagos, Aderibigbe earned his bachelor's degree in history at the University of Lagos in 2014, after which he was admitted to the MFA program in creative writing at Boston University, where he received a Robert Pinsky Global Fellowship. Upon completing his masters studies in 2017, he proceeded to Florida State University where he earned his doctorate degree in 2022, majoring in English and Creative Writing, with a minor in Global Black Literature. == Career == Aderibigbe's debut poetry collection, How the End First Showed, won the 2018 Brittingham Prize in Poetry, a Florida Book Award, and was a finalist for Glenna Luschei Prize for African Poets. He is also the author of a poetry chapbook, In Praise of Our Absent Father, selected for the New Generation African Poets Series of the African Poetry Book Fund. His first full-length manuscript, My Mothers' Songs and Other Similar Songs I Learnt received a special mention in the 2015 Sillerman First Book Prize for African Poets. Aderibigbe's poems have appeared in the African American Review, Alaska Quarterly Review, Notre Dame Review, Poet Lore, The Nation, Ninth Letter, Poetry Review, Prairie Schooner, Rattle, and elsewhere, and has been featured on Verse Daily. Aderibigbe has won several fellowships, residencies and honours from the James Merrill House, Banff Center for the Arts, Provincetown Fine Arts Work Center, Ucross Foundation, Sewanee Writers’ Conference (Walter E. Dakin Fellowship) at the University of the South, OMI International Arts Center, the Jentel Foundation, among others. == References == Category:Nigerian poets Category:Nigerian writers Category:University of Lagos alumni Category:Boston University alumni Category:Florida State University alumni Category:University of Southern Mississippi faculty Category:Living people Category:1989 births